thank you very much Senator and it is a
pleasure and an honor to be here I'm
speaking today as a clinical research
scientist this is an Endeavor with I
with which I have some familiarity
because I've conducted many such studies
and I'm aware of their difficulty I'm
also speaking as a clinician and a
parent and a sometime philosopher of
science we'll start with the general in
this discussion
and move towards the
specific generally it's vital to
understand that science
itself is an ethical even a
philosophical SL religious
Enterprise
why because the scientists who Advance
Humanity inevitably operate within an a
prior framework of
Faith what are the elements of that
faith belief that the world is orderly
in its foundation its nature and its
Spirit belief that such order is
understandable to the mind of man and
woman belief that the pursuit of such
understanding is possible and
laudable and a belief that good itself
will come of the pursuit of
understanding there's a meta principle
that underlies these more explicit rules
and that is that the the understanding
the understanding that the scientific
aim must be
true for the truth to be
revealed this means that science aimed
at career Prestige professorship and
funding to say nothing of Darker
motivations such as Pride revenge or the
wish for
Destruction is not science at
all much of what purports to be Science
Now is instead the the garnering of
personal credit career advancement and
economic gain that all derivative and
essentially parasitic activity can
temporarily
produce this not does not result in
truth we should also not be confusing
medicine as currently taught and
practiced with science the education of
modern physicians may familiarize them
with the basics of physiology and
biology ology and the details of their
specific practice this is by no means
the same thing as teaching them how to
conduct or evaluate scientific research
which is something that takes years of
specialized training to manage why am I
making these
points so that we understand explicitly
that aim and ethical orientation Define
the scientific
Pursuit and so that we pay enough
attention here today to establishing
that aim
and ensuring that
orientation when you're a scientist and
you're doing statistical analysis it's
easy to believe for example if you don't
know anything about science or
statistical analysis that the
statistical process is a mathematics
machine into which you pour data and
crank out truth and that is just
absolutely not how it works at all when
you're doing statistical analysis you're
making a thousand micro decisions every
single one of which is ethical you have
to decide which numbers to include and
which numbers to exclude and you have to
understand why and you have to work
against your own hypothesis and even
against your own research interest to
ensure that you're not deluding yourself
in the public and if you're a careerist
or interested in Prestige then all of
that goes out the window and what you
produce will be highly misleading to you
and everyone else it's and it's very
difficult to orient yourself so that you
fight against that you have to be
terrified of the falsehoods that you
might produce and where they might lead
you and everyone else and so now having
considered that you have to start to
understand what it is that should
constitute your
aim what would require in the case that
we're discussing to make America truly
healthy again and to orient true
scientists toward that aim it's a
retooling of the research Enterprise
from the top down as well as the bottom
up so that the goal would be clear the
incentives aligned and the most
productive actors identified rewarded
encouraged and capitalized this could be
facilitated politically by making a more
specific goal clear we could begin that
as we should by formulating an
appropriate diagnosis we need to get the
problem right what is the major problem
what are the major problems bedeviling
the American people one such is public
health clearly and more so all the time
despite the extensive government
spending in that domain and despite the
negligible attention historically paid
to the details of health research and
practice by the political
class American children are fat diabetic
and increasingly Miserable as they
progress towards middle age those yet
not captured in
childhood by obesity in insin resistance
high blood sugar and inflammatory
dysfunction are likely to suffer it then
with near certainty by the onset of a
declining old age and expensively
so what might what might we aim for
instead slim healthy athletic optimistic
and courageous
children strong psychologically
integrated generous adults resilient
active productive seniors still
contributing to their communities
combined with either or both of much
less spending or much better results for
the
cost how could this aim be
accomplished within the community of
Health focused researchers and
practitioners and incentivized
politically America faces a
multi-dimensional diagnostic conundrum
its people suffer from a plethora of
symptoms and syndromes too high
increasing body mass indices rising
blood sugar levels Associated risk for
psychological disorder immunological
disregulation that increases risk of
neurological degeneration cancer and
heart disease to name a few my daughter
referred earlier to her terrible
childhood experiences inquiry and
experimentation communication of all
that and the social consequences among a
multitude of people with various chronic
health conditions what was her prime
scientifically relevant
realization the answer to this question
what do all Fat Sick unhappy people have
in
common at least this they all
eat how could that brute and singular
fact be varied and studied is a
technical discourse on the formulation
of adequate scientific hypothesis
epidemiological studies associating any
given dietary habit with some outcome of
Health inevitably
fail trying as they are to establish a
correspondence between only two factors
in a sea of causal
possibility science can only progress
genuine science can only progress when
such inquiry is simplified radically so
that single variables of interest can be
assessed for causal significance this is
difficult to manage in the case of
diet but it no longer seems impossible
the
reason because of the actual possibility
of radical simplification on the food
consumption side elimination diets offer
a potential solution to this problem
most of them make little sense however
conceptually or scientifically they
eliminate Foods in an often random and
fattish manner often because of the
spoken or unspoken ideological concerns
of their proponents in addition they're
insufficiently simple the range of foods
involved so that scientific analysis of
causality can take place must be reduced
to the minimum for genuine analysis of
causality to take place you're
chronically
ill you have a plethora of symptoms you
eat a multitude of foods there's some
relationship between the food and the
outcome at least in principle how are
you going to determine that well no
simple analysis is possible because of
the multiplicity of factors both on the
symptom side and on the dietary side so
you reduce the complexity of your
diet optimally to a single variable well
that's what my daughter Michaela did now
we know some things about such
reduction these are things that are
important to
know ketogenic diets switch the body to
Fat metabolism so they constitute a step
in that direction if you flip your body
to fat metabolism and your and your
symptoms decline then you know that the
metabolic illness that you're suffering
from has some association with glucose
metabolism now Michaela I believe or
perhaps yeah it was Michaela mentioned
the fact that uh for a century childhood
epilepsy has been treated with a
ketogenic diet because your brain won't
go into convulsions if you're not
feeding its sugar that's a good example
of simplification to a single variable
now another alternative or associated uh
issue with ketogenic diets is
restriction of carbohydrate and sugar
intake so they eliminate the
contribution of the glucose dependent
metabolic Pathway to obesity insulin
resistance SL diabetes and inflammation
your body can burn sugar or it can burn
fat and in our society we run primarily
on glucose metabolism but there's no
necessity for that not least because
there is no recommended daily allowance
for
carbohydrate right you can live with
zero carbohydrate and zero is not a lot
so that's a remarkable fact in and of
itself given that the primary caloric
Source in our diet that we have in our
diet is actually
carbohydrate so that can be eliminated
and the consequences analyzed and that
can happen relatively quickly and people
can do it and it's inexpensive and it
doesn't harm people so those are all
very good things from a research
perspective the consequence of a
ketogenic intake switch to ketogenic
intake can be analyzed as well you can
monitor weight blood sugar and assorted
symptoms of inflammation including those
associated with psychological disorder
the anecdotal evidence that we've picked
up because many many people have
communicated with our family is that the
typical obese person can expect to lose
7 to 20 pounds per month on a ketogenic
or plant-free ketogenic diet that that
will continue month after month until
virtually all of their body fat is
eliminated that they can do that with no
hunger although there will be some
cravings which are not precisely the
same thing and that that's actually
maintainable over the long run with that
reduction in obesity comes radical
Improvement in blood sugar for example
and often an improvement in the kinds of
psychological conditions that Dr Chris
Palmer for example has been studying is
a very
remarkable concatenation of positive
effects some of which are quite
unexpected especially I would say on the
depression and anxiety side because
those have been you viewed for a very
long time as you know consequences of
Life stress and Trauma and that can
happen but the fact that the
psychological disorders seem amenable to
treatment by ketogenic or plant-free
ketogenic diets could be nothing short
of a revolution because those are very
intractable conditions and they're also
sources of unbelievably immense
suffering plant-free ketogenic diets
that's a carnivorous diet let's say or
even more restricted a carnivorous diet
that's restricted to um to ruminant
animals push that simplification to its
extreme well why would you do that well
if you're trying to cond conduct a true
scientific analysis let's say of the
relationship between diet and health
you'd want to reduce the diet to the
simplest possible underlying what what
what would you say the simplest possible
underlying
maintainable structure and we know that
that can be attained with a carnivorous
diet you can live on that for a very
long time um in fact whole societies
have done that for like the Inuit in
Northern Canada when they've survived on
primarily meat for well their entire
cultural history so we know that that's
possible if your symptoms don't resolve
in consequence well then there's no loss
except that it's a difficult diet to
attempt and if they do resolve well
that's a pretty good deal for you and
then it's inexpensive and there's going
to be all sorts of corollary benefits
and then with any luck if your symptoms
do resolve and you find the diet too
restrictive you can start by introducing
one food category at a time and
carefully and so with any luck you'll be
able to get back to something
approximating hopefully not a typical
American diet that's sugar and
carbohydrate loaded but at least one
that's varied enough to maintain your
interest none of this seems impossible
and The more I've thought about this as
a scientist and I I came to these
conclusions with great hesitancy by the
way because I know it's quite a radical
solution but as I was thinking it
through as a scientist it just became
more and more obvious it's like you
don't want to hurt people when you're
attempting to generate a solution to a
health problem that they have and a
ketogenic diet certainly won't hurt them
it might help if it doesn't well then
you can stop doing it it's very
inexpensive it's within at least in
principle within the behavioral realm
that people can attain can can manage
and uh it's simple enough so that you
can actually do a causal analysis plus
the results appear quickly enough so
that that's maintaining and rewarding it
end of itself that's a pretty good
that's a pretty good list of positive
possibilities and
so the there's another Advantage as well
with regards to ketogenic or plant-free
ketogenic diets is that um the people on
them don't have to be hungry so most of
the time when people are considering
something like weight loss they think
they have to go on a diet so they need
to go on a diet they need to lose 30 lb
or 40 lb or 50 or 100 lb and then the
theory is they've lost the weight and
they can go off the diet which they want
to do because they're always hungry on
the diet and no one can maintain that
and then they go off the diet they go
back to their old eating habits and bang
they weigh exactly what they weighed or
more because that's the typical pattern
as a consequence of
overeating in relationship to the food
deprivation on a ketogenic diet you
don't have to be hungry you can eat as
much as you want and they're very
satiating and so that doesn't seem to be
a problem and something that's
sustainable in the long run the most
important thing however as far as I'm
concerned from the scientific
perspective is the radical
simplification of the causal analysis
right if you go on a ketogenic or
plant-free ketogenic diet and your
symptoms remit you know you know that
there's some relationship between what
you're consuming and the health outcome
and so that's exactly what you want to
know if you're chronically ill and maybe
well then you're fortunate as well
because it's remitted you can start to
experiment and see if you can find out
the actual cause and that opens up the
scientific Endeavor to a much broader in
a much broader way because that would
mean that we could reduce the typical
chronically ill person's diet to a
ketogenic or plant-free ketogenic diet
and then we could do causal analysis
with different classes of food to see
which classes of food were contributing
to which Downstream illnesses and so
that would be a real good deal for
everyone too and this like this sort of
scientific endeavor is is it's certainly
technically possible it's difficult to
find participants and clinical research
is a difficult Endeavor but none of this
is impossible and the additional
Advantage also is that it's not going to
hurt
people okay so we'll close with
this what is the most logical upward
aiming scientific approach to the
problem of American Health
identification of diet as the potential
common mechanism radical simplification
of that diet analysis of programmatic
variation of that simplified diet as
food items are added in by category 1 by
one those with chronic andrac illnesses
could thus well be placed by default on
a plant-free ketogenic diet for the
several mere months that it would take
to assess the consequences this is a
revolutionary but manageable
proposition before it becomes a
generalized standard of care however the
relevant studies should be done we have
more than sufficient anecdotal data
pertaining to the positive effect of
such simplified diets the testimony of
thousands of people which is not
sufficient to constitute proof but is
certainly sufficient to justify
hypothesis the goal is Health the
approach is generally of upward aim and
commitment to the truth the specific
strategy is restriction of all
extraneous dietary variables analysis of
the consequences of that restriction and
then systematic variation with the
return into a more varied diet simple
elegant implementable
necessary the alternative given the
crisis that confronts us on multiple
Health fronts is
Dreadful the continued sickening of the
American people with all the
unsustainable economic burden that
sickening is and will continue to
produce demoralization decline in
productivity and spiraling health care
costs that are already mounting to the
point of unsustainability when we could
replace that miserable future with
something much brighter and healthier if
we had the moral and political will to
do
so thank you very much
[Music]